theory.txt 0.0.5                     UTF-8                       dh:2020-07-19
----|----1----|----2----|----3----|----4----|----5----|----6----|----7----|--*

                          MISER THEORETICAL CONCEPTION
                          ============================

               MISER STANDING IN THEORETICAL MODELS OF COMPUTATION
               ---------------------------------------------------

             <https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/theory.txt>

             If a result is important, you badly want to find different
             ways to see that fact; that's much safer.  If you have only
             one proof, and it contains an error, then you're left with
             nothing.  Having several proofs is not only safer, it gives
             you more insight, and it gives you more understanding.  After
             all, the real goal of mathematics is to obtain insight, not
             just proofs.
                                 -- Gregory Chaitin [Chaitin2005, p.25]

SYNOPSIS

A critical objective of the Miser Project is demonstration of a universal
model of computation (one among many), that reveals how the stored-program
principle and some elementary arrangements are so amenable to providing many
levels of computational facility.

Theoretical adequacy is demonstrated by an elementary applicative system that
captures the essential nature of stored-program digital computing.  The system
is demonstrated to be universal in the Church-Turing sense.  The system is
also implemented in conventional computer software as an enactment of the
Miser Project applicative computational model.

Development of the theoretical underpinnings and confirmation of universality is accomplished in a staged progression, leading up to consideration of
practical application.

APPROACH

The first Miser Project employment of theoretical models arises in the
<https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/oMiser/obtheory.txt> introduction
of the ‹ob› mathematical structure.

With regard to computational interpretation of theories, there is reliance on
transitivity of computational interpretation: If mathematical structure ‹A›
has interpretation in structure ‹B›, and structure ‹B› has a computational
interpretation, then that is a sufficient for computational interpretaton of
‹A›.

Taking ‹ob› for ‹B›, this principle has been applied taking Boolean Algebras
in position of ‹A› (and among each other) in the manner described in boole.txt
<https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/oMiser/boole.txt>.

The ‹ob› model of computation is itself characterized in obaptheory.txt,
<https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/oMiser/obaptheory.txt>.  The
computable functions f(x) on Ob are defined to be those for which there is
a script, p, such that obap.ap(p, x) = f(x) is determined.

We claim that obap.ap(p, x) and the closely-related obap.eval(e) are
equivalent to other universal models of computation.

The question of being universal-enough is addressed by demonstrating that the
‹ob› model of computation is sufficient for simulation of other accepted
universal models.

 * Church's λ-calculus is given a computational interpretation using the
   already-equivalent system of combinators, ‹ca›, as in combinators.txt
   <https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/oMiser/combinators.txt>,
   also achieving an emergent notion of types.

 * A complete representation of Turing machines establishes achievement of a
   Universal TM simulated in Miser.

 * The grounding case of Number Theory and the theory of Recursive Functions
   is accomplished via representation of natural numbers and the computational
   representation of general recursive functions on the naturals.

 * We might examine Algorithmic Information Theory to see if light can be
   shed on the that means of addressing the limitations of computation using
   the Miser computational model instead of one tied more directly to LISP.

That establishes the ‹ob› model to be no weaker, in this absolute sense, than
those others already regarded as equivalent under the Church-Turing thesis.

That it is no stronger in that same sense can be presumed by conducting one
or more simulations in the other direction.  We shall wave at some particular
cases as evidence of being no more powerful, including the enactment of the
model in a digital computer.

 * The ability to deal formally with obs as expressions is also demonstrated
   by defining λ-abstraction and recursion labeling (ρ-abstraction), since
   this makes things much handier although not particularly reversible. This
   is a start on having more-expressive representations.

[to be continued]



REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY

 * challenges.txt addresses some topics that will be explicated more here.
   <https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/challenges.txt>.

 * Some challenges and issues appear to be beyond the requirements for
   establishing the Church-Turing computability capabilities of oMiser.  The
   challenge is dealing with non-functional situations in a manner that allows
   significant functional determinations and derivations to be preserved.
   The essential question is how to isolate side-effects and dependencies of
   various kinds for maximal preservation of our ability to reason about the
   procedures that are situated in that kind of environment.  This may depend
   on logic.txt, <https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/logic.txt>.

[Chaitin1998]
   Chaitin, Gregory J.  The Limits of Mathematics: A Course on Information
   Theory and the Limits of Formal Reasoning.  Springer (Singapore: 1998).
   ISBN 981-3083-59-X.  An objective in exploration of this material is using
   oMiser to demonstrate Algorithmic Information Theory, and its concrete
   cases, with sufficient translation of the version of LISP used by Chaitin.

[Chaitin1999]
   Chaitin, Gregory J.  The Unknowable.  Springer (Singapore: 1999).  ISBN
   981-4021-72-5.  This follow-in to [Chaitin1998] provides some additional
   support including application to incompleteness and the Turing halting
   problem.  These should have aligned demonstrations in the oMiser computa-
   tional model interpretation of ‹ob› obap.ap.

[Chaitin2005]
   Chaitin, Gregory J.  Meta Math!: the Quest for Omega.  Pantheon (New York:
   2005).  ISBN 0-375-42313-3.  Digging deeper into the nature of mathematics,
   computation, and scientific understanding.  We make no metaphysical
   commitments in our application of Chaitin's ideas and algorithmic
   information theory.

[Kleene1950]
   Kleene, Stephen Cole.  Introduction to Meta-Mathematics.  1950 edition
   with Michael Beeson foreword.  ISHI Press International (Bronx: 2009).
   ISBN 0-923891-57-9.  Kleene's bridging of model theory, recursive function
   theory, the λ-calculus, and Turing computability is the establishment of
   what is taken as Church-Turing computability, although Kleene did not
   confuse Turing computability and Church's Thesis.  It is rather the
   recognition of equivalences, not identities and those connections among
   Church, Gödel, and Turing.  Kleene's reformulation of the Turing Machine
   is the one relied upon in later development.  This textbook is presented as
   suitable for graduate-school treatment.  Kleene was admirably positioned
   for this undertaking, being a student of Church and having met Gödel at
   that time (and having taken renouned notes of Gödel's Princeton lectures).

[Kleene1967]
   Kleene, Stephen Cole.  Mathematical Logic. Dover unabridged edition,
   (Mineola, New York: 2002). ISBN 0-486-42533-9. This more-accessible
   treatment beyond [Kleene1950] introduces his use of "Church-Turing thesis"
   (§41).  Kleene does not treat the λ-calculus and λ-definability here,
   choosing to simply use Turing Machines for his treatment of computability
   and decidability in this shorter and less demanding textbook.

[Petzold2008]
   Petzold, Charles.  The Annotated Turing: A Guided Tour through Alan
   Turing's Historic Paper on Computability and the Turing Machine.  Wiley
   (Indianapolis: 2008).  ISBN 978-0-470-22905-7.  Written with great care,
   this treatment provides thoughtful context on Alan Turing, himself, and
   the world in which computation theory was introduced.  Fundamental sources
   are identified and accounted for in the narrative, which addresses the
   Church-Turing thesis and the differentiation of the computable.  Recounts
   puzzles concerning the situation of computation in the workings of the
   universe and the plight of humans knowing themselves.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                     Copyright 2018, 2020 Dennis E. Hamilton

    Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
    you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
    You may obtain a copy of the License at

        http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

    Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
    distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
    WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
    See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
    limitations under the License.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

ATTRIBUTION

   Hamilton, Dennis E. Miser Standing in Theoretical Models of Computation. Miser Theoretical Conception text file theory.txt version 0.0.5 dated
   2020-07-19, available on the Internet as a version of
   <https://github.com/orcmid/miser/blob/master/theory.txt>

TODO

 * Find other TODOs of this nature and transpose them to this file.

 * Reconcile the inclusion, by some, of partial functions under the
   effectively-computable ones.  This seems to collide with the halting
   problem.  Check the treatment of the Church-Turing Thesis in SEP and also,
   possibly in Davis and maybe Rogers.

 * Recover the article on the completeness of cons, car, and cdr for appeal
   with respect to ob.c, ob.a, ob.b, and ob.e.  Make the bridge to the
   completeness with respect to effectively computable obs.

 * Identify the stages for establishment of universality.

 * Identify the confirmations, including lambda-calculus, Turing Machine,
   and other simulations.

 * It might not be here, but the relationship to the Backus FP and FFP may
   require some explanation as well.

 * Address the apparent distinction around flavors of interpretation.

 * The common reliance on encoding and operating to within number theory
   (i.e., denumerable domains) is a matter for the reverse case.  That is,
   we can treat representation via encoding in oMiser as equivalent to
   encoding in PA, but more amenable to exposure of the stored-program
   principle and also simpler (but not easy or efficient) representations
   of other models in demonstration of Church-Turing computability.

 * Get the Church-Turing Thesis amalgamation in a clear manner.  Find
   accessible versions of core sources.  In particular, dismantle the
   attribution of Kleene as reducing Church-Turing Thesis to Turing
   Computability.

 * Find a characterization of Recursive Function Theory to allude to here.

 * Address emulation and the ability to emulate members of sets whose
   totalities are inaccessible, including those of greater cardinality than
   the denumerables.  We have fewer and fewer computable cases, yet these seem
   to be plentiful enough.

 * That the same object can be a representation in many ways (avoiding the
   temptation to say innumerable), what does that say about the computable?
   It would appear that the expression of representation as interpretation of
   a theory may somehow limit us to computability after all.

 * The situation of category theory here is problematic.  One can maybe talk
   ourselves up the ladder, but maybe not compute ourselved along the same
   route.  The treatment of classes tied to predicates might be revealing.

 * Explain the transitivity of computational interpretation and then how
   we need to work to establish (1) universality and equivalence of the
   offered ‹ob› computational model.

 * Separate this specific arrangement from mathlogic.txt (tbd) where we
   have applied logical theories (using FOL= typically) and then switch to
   mechanizing logic and in particular computational logic on ‹ob› itself.

 * The mathlogic.txt may be needed to comprehend exactly how there are
   higher-level computational representations (i.e., with respect to
   functional type) while still confined to representability in the Ob domain.
   The denumerability matters come into play here.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 0.0.5 2020-07-19-12:22 Extensive drafting of Synopsis and Approach.
 0.0.4 2020-07-18-13:56 Continuing touch-ups, references, and connections, and
       starting the Synopsis.
 0.0.3 2020-07-10-10:12 More TODOs Pondering, touch-ups
 0.0.2 2020-07-06-12:34 Add [Petzold2008] along with musings/notes on the
       topic here.
 0.0.1 2018-08-09-11:48 Add Chaitin material.  This is not primary, but an
       element of what to explore via the Miser Project.
 0.0.0 2018-04-17-13:25 Create placeholder, with starter TODOs on the
       connection of oMiser to computation theory.


                        *** end of theory.txt ***
